Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Philip Jose Farmer has been a mainstay science fiction writer since 1952.
He has written over 40 novels and over 80 short stories focusing on a wide variety of subjects.
These range from Tarzan to the afterlife, from sex-crazed aliens to a star-faring Catholic priest.
Farmer's most famous works are the Riverworld series, the World of Tears series, his erotic fantasy novels,
and the story, later a novel, The Lovers. We asked Farmer how he started writing science fiction.
I started reading science fiction when I was 7 years old. I'm 63 now.
And I knew I always wanted to be a writer, although I didn't do much about it for many years.
The funny thing is I actually intended to become a mainstream writer, that is, to write stories which are not in particular genre.
But I somehow or other just drifted into science fiction and sold my first science fiction story in 1952.
That was called The Lovers. It was a novel-let which was published in a magazine,
and it's generally credited with breaking the taboo against the mature use of sex in science fiction magazine.
We asked Farmer if he consciously set out to break taboos by writing The Lovers.
No, I had an idea for a story and I couldn't write it unless I broke the taboo.
I didn't really consciously set out to do it because I had the idea and I thought it was terrific.
On the other hand, I knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting as accepted as I did.
I did have a lot of trouble.
The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, who was the editor of The Stounding,
was the most prestigious and highest paying market, so naturally I sent it to him first.
He returned it with a comment that in a nausea editing.
So I sent it to Horace Gold who was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious and had about the same rate rates.
His comments were something like John Campbell's.
Then I sent it to Samuel Mayans who was editor of a magazine called Starling Stories.
He immediately accepted it and knew it was a revolutionary breakthrough.
He published it and I was on my way.
I accepted the next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary and it took me a year before I could get anybody to accept it.
Farmer is also interested in religion and its varied forms and has used it in his works.
My interest in religion has manifested itself throughout all my work.
Although a lot of people when they say the name Farmer, they think of sex in both.
Fact is I've written much more about religion than about sex.
Or sometimes both at the same time.
Something in some respects, sex and religion are two sides of the same coin.
In certain fields of activity.
But religion is only one of many themes.
Farmer feels that he may have labored in relative anonymity for years because his writings are so varied, but he has his reasons.
One of the reasons I've had trouble in the early days I think really becoming identified and getting a ban on the fallers is that I didn't beat on just one or two drums.
I ranged all over the field.
But I find out that if I do a variety of stuff and I don't get tired, each new novel is a new challenge.
I'm not just working the same old theme again.
Tomorrow we continue with more on Philip Jose Farmer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is about the science fiction genre.
The story is about the science fiction genre.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
We're continuing our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
We want to explore here some background related to one of Farmer's major themes, religion.
As Farmer allowed earlier, he considers himself a writer of religious themes even more so than a writer of sexual themes.
His own religious background is quite checkered.
I was sent to Sunday School when I was very little and I came interested in the Bible and I read it on my own.
And I even read the Book of Mormon, which was about nine years old.
And I always wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality, predestination, grace, gastro-life and all that sort of stuff.
I was raised as a Christian scientist up until the time I was about twelve.
And then I was sent to a Presbyterian church where there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of predestination.
And then when I was about sixteen, I guess I became an atheist.
Now I've gone through atheism through agnosticism and now I was converted to the disciples of Christ.
And then I backslid, fell from grace, as the theological term goes.
And then I lapsed back into agnosticism.
And what are farmers present beliefs?
My present situation is that without immortality life has no meaning.
If there's a creation there must be a creator.
But I've come tremendously interested in what to sometimes refer to as myth.
It isn't really like the Muslims, the Muslims Sufism school.
Then a lot of related stuff like that.
Like here right now I'm in a sort of a limbo heading towards something I don't know what.
The concept of an afterlife appears repeatedly in farmers' works.
Well, if you think about it, there could be a million different possibilities in a natural life, in their work.
But one of my perhaps unstated themes is that immortality may not depend upon a supernatural being.
It's in the evolutionary drive of man for him to invent immortality himself.
Well, the drawback to that is those people who are already dead will remain dead, right?
That doesn't correspond to the religious idea of immortality where everybody is raised from the first human being to the last one.
I like to do a lot of variations on that.
I have a new book called The Unraising Mask.
That's the quotation from the book.
This is concerned with theology, afterlife, immortality.
You might call it a philosophical theological space opera.
Many of farmers' first works had the central theme of religion.
The lovers and a woman a day deal with a future amalgamation of church and state called the Sturge.
A popular character, Father John Carmody, is a planet-hopping Catholic priest who has appeared in several short stories.
We learn about his former life and conversion in the excellent novel Night of Light.
Inside Outside is a wild tale about the afterlife and immortality.
It is in fact the predecessor to the famous River World series, which we will discuss in our next show.
The Unraising Mask
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Having looked into Philip Hosey's farmer's feelings on religion and immortality,
we began a look today at the River World series.
Farmer explains the basis of the story.
It concerns a planet in which there's a 10 million mile long river which follows the valley.
And everybody has lived from about 150,000 B.C. to about 1983 A.D. was resurrected along the banks of the river
and rejuvenated for them, looked like they were 25.
And the main mystery behind the whole thing was why were all these people resurrected?
Who did it and how?
But the River World concept is so big that farmers managed only to scratch the surface in the four main novels of the series.
There are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of those four novels,
but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too much.
It wasn't taking too many sidetracks, you might say.
I'd still be working on that particular series.
What else is left? Listen to farmer as he gives us an inkling of what he would like to cover.
I didn't go into any detail on how you could work out viable societies with people from every place and every time.
I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous people on that planet.
Well, there's Carl Marx, for instance.
What would he think of what happened to his ideas about communism on the planet Earth after he died?
Leonardo da Vinci, his ideas about art, plus the fact that he's on a planet where there are very few pigments available, for instance, for him to paint.
What would he do there?
I also wanted to bring up various figures from science and the military, philosophy and so forth, and show what they would do there.
Now, one of the things about the River World was that although you were resurrected there in a useful body of your own, as it was in 25, or earlier, if you died in 1425,
if you're just, for instance, you were 83 when you were dying, and your mind is still 83 and you have 83 years of experience on Earth behind you.
Now, is your character formed? Are you going to go through perhaps a thousand years being the same person, or are you going to improve?
And is the magic labyrinth the last word on the River World?
I made a lot of people mad at me. Because of that last sentence or paragraph I should say I wrote on the magic labyrinth.
Everything seems to have been settled. Everything has been cleared up.
And then one of the characters, the kind of minor one, Peter J. Strigat, he's celebrating with the others in the misty tar when he thinks he hears a football outside in the hallway.
He goes out, comes back, says to the others, I didn't see anyone. It must have been my imagination.
A lot of readers got mad at me because they thought, oh no, he's going to write another one.
He's leaving a loophole. Well, I am leaving a loophole. And I don't know whether I'll go through it or not.
But it's quite possible that the magic labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series before that everything that our protagonist learns and everything that everybody else learns is completely untrue.
So the River World novels may or may not be finished, but we do have some more side stream stories to anticipate. More on Farmer tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The story of the Fiction Fiction is a story about a man who was born in the middle of the world and who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who
was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man who was a man him
coming up next is the science fiction radio show so stay with us
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Our show today continues the discussion with Philip Jose Farmer.
A major incident in Farmer's career began when Venus on the Half Shell,
a novel written under the pseudonym Kilgore Trout,
appeared in the pages of fantasy and science fiction in late 74, early 75.
Of course, Kilgore Trout is the creation of author Kurt Vonnegut Jr.
The character Trout is an impoverished, underappreciated science fiction writer
who appears in a number of Vonnegut's novels.
We asked Farmer if he identifies with Kilgore Trout.
I was a fan of Vonnegut. I like all those books, but Kilgore Trout really turned me on
because his early experiences, as a matter of fact his later ones,
were like a lot of my early experiences.
A lot of the experiences, like the other science fiction writers back in the old days
weren't being paid much, and science fiction would look down upon.
And we were being taken due to our inexperience with various publishers and agents.
Also, I had a tough time getting any recognition.
I guess that's why I identified with him. Plus, in fact, he's a great character.
Vonnegut did not appreciate the reviews given Venus on the Half Shell, either pro or con,
because most of the reviewers approached the work as if Vonnegut were the author.
This cost Farmer the opportunity to write another novel under the Kilgore Trout pseudonym.
I don't know what is the reaction to this art of the novel itself, but so many people thought that he'd written it.
He was deluged, hundreds of maybe thousands of places.
Then the reviews came out.
Some said Venus on the Half Shell by Kilgore Trout was the worst thing he'd written,
and others said it was the best thing he'd ever written.
When I applied for permission to write The Sun of Jimmy Valentine, which I really would have loved,
I could have had a lot of fun with it.
He said no, which is his prerogative.
We asked if The Sun of Jimmy Valentine was Kilgore Trout's one erotic novel.
It was not only his one and only specifically erotic book.
It was also his only non-fictional book.
Farmer obviously enjoys writing about fictional authors who in turn write about their own fictional authors, and so on.
Listen as he describes what writing as Kilgore Trout started.
In the Venus on the Half Shell, the protagonist, Simon Lagstaff, had his favorite science fiction author.
Just as in the Vonnegut book, the Elliott Rose Waterbust of Kilgore Trout was the greatest living writer in any field.
He should have been President of the U.S. and couldn't have solved all the problems.
Anyway, in Venus on the Half Shell, Simon Lagstaff liked to read the science fiction works of a fellow called Jonathan Swiss Somers the Third.
And I describe his various works as an out-vitam and give the titles.
But Jonathan Swiss Somers, who is a fictional author, wrote about a giant German shepherd police dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200 in a laboratory and he became a private detective.
Now, I plan eventually on writing a book by Ralph von Baubau, this dog, under the name Ralph von Baubau.
And then maybe I'll end the cycle by having Ralph von Baubau write about a human named vonnegut or something like that and completing it, going right back to Vonnegut again.
Farmer conceded with the extended family group called the Vold Newton family in which many great historical and fictional characters are descended from the scarlet Pimpernel.
Thus Kilgore Trout is related to Sherlock Holmes, Doc Savage, Sam Spade and James Bond, among others.
We will look into this aspect of Farmer's writing some more tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with
a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of episodes with a series of
episodes with aExis.
Greetings and welcome.
Nothing to lose at all?
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
This show will conclude our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
Yesterday we discussed Farmer's pension for riding under pseudonyms.
As it turns out this practice has a very desirable side effect.
One of the funny things about this is that I found out that I could use the
fictional author device to break a writing block.
I had a writing block once, so that terrible thing that sometimes happens to writers.
They don't know what's caused this for some reason.
They might have many ideas, be eager to go, but when they sit down in front of a typewriter nothing happens.
Well, that happened to me once.
I never thought it would. I thought I was immune to such things.
It was dead.
And after wrestling for two months and getting no place, I had an idea.
I sat down at the typewriter and wrote a story, not by Philip Jose Farmer, but by David Copperfield, I'd say.
I don't remember which particular nom to call it.
The story poured out. Very good. I thought so anyway.
When I'd completed that, the writing block was gone.
See, I wasn't writing then as me, Philip Jose Farmer, but as I say, Gilbert Trout.
And I was in his shoes. I had no trouble.
The funny thing about this is it's a psychological trick that I'm conscious of.
And yet it works.
It's not like I'm trying to trick my unconscious, but I must be doing it somewhere.
I don't know of anybody else who's ever broken a writer's block in that manner, but I recommend trying it.
Farmer has also written several books featuring Tarzan or Tarzan-like characters.
Tarzan Alive is Tarzan's biography.
The erotic novel A Feast Unknown and its clean sequels The Mad Goblin and Lord of the Trees
feature thinly veiled versions of Tarzan and Doc Savage.
Lord Tiger, the Opar books, and the Adventures of the Peerless Peer also have Tarzan-like protagonists.
We asked Farmer when he developed his interest in Tarzan.
I first read Tarzan when I guess I was about seven or eight years old.
I became wrapped up in that early age with the words of, let your eyes swirl.
But when I started college, I kind of lost interest in reading anymore.
But later Farmer picked up on Tarzan again.
This time he saw Tarzan in a different light.
When I started reading the books about Tarzan again, and this time, although I still kept a lot of my childhood interest in him,
I had not seen before.
He was not just a child who'd been cast away and raised by great apes and then become a creature of the jungle,
then returned to playing the torch, and he was sort of an archetype of many, many heroes from classical myth.
And now I'm sure that when Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing, but he did it unconsciously.
I think the creation of Tarzan was just a genius.
Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has a great character just like Akelin and Doyle is not a great writer,
but he created a great character, Sherlock Holmes.
Philip Jose Farmer, an author with a seemingly endless supply of unique ideas who appears just now to be gaining widespread acceptance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is a production of the science fiction series,